---
layout: post
title: GSoC Week 11 !!
subtitle: Week 11 ends..
gh-repo: ArighnaIITG/arighnaiitg.github.io
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
bigimg: /img/gsoc1.jpg
tags: [gsoc, sympy, week 11]
comments: true
---

The second last week has also come to an end. We are almost there at the end of the ride. Me and **Sartaj** had a meeting on **13th of August** about the final leftovers to be done, and wrapping up the GSoC work successfully. Here are the works which have been completed in Week 11, and the last amount of work to be completed in Week 12.

  - I feel happy to let you know that both the previous PRs, the first `aseries` [PR #17167](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17167), and the `FomalPowerSeries` class [PR #17134](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17134) has been merged by Sartaj. Some important code finally in the repository of SymPy.
  
  - The second `aseries` [PR #17303](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17303) needs some work to be done. There are currently some bugs which are popping up, which are becoming hard to debug. Hopefully, I can debug them by week 12, and the PR can then be merged, marking the end of the work in the field of `Asymptotic Series`.
  
  - Also, I started work in the field of `limits`. I had accumulated some failing limit tests, which I listed in [Issue #17380](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/issues/17380).
  For example -

```javascript
>>> from sympy import *
>>> x = symbols('x')
>>> limit(x*(((x + 1)**2 + 1)/(x**2 + 1) - 1), x, oo)
0
```
while the answer actually should be `2`.

Also,

```javascript
>>> from sympy import *
>>> x = symbols('x')
>>> limit(x*(-1 + (x + log(x + 1) + 1)/(x + log(x))), x ,oo)
0
```
while the actual answer should be `1`.

  So, I pushed a [PR #17381](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17381), and there I added some logic in `core/add.py`. You can visit my PR for the logic and more failing tests, which are being corrected. Currently it is undergoing reviews, and it should be merged by the end of Week 12.
  
  That's it for this week.! See you in the last and final blog post of the summer!!
