---
layout: post
title: GSoC Week 1 !!
subtitle: Week 1 ends..
gh-repo: ArighnaIITG/arighnaiitg.github.io
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
bigimg : /img/gsoc1.png
tags: [test]
comments: true
---

Week 1 of the `Coding Period (Phase 1)` is coming to an end. It was a hectic week for me, as I had to travel in the initial days of the week, but the work done in Community Bonding Period, helped me to progress faster. I also had a meeting with **Sartaj** on Wednesday (29-05-2019). We talked about the remaining work needed to be done in Week 1, and the initial work of Week 2.

   - Obviously, [PR #16869](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/16869) needed refactoring. The old code had a lot of nesting, and I wrote the code without the help of other SymPy functions. After gathering helpful insight from Sartaj, I used other pieces of existing SymPy APIs, and made the code a lot smaller. The PR is now in a stage of getting approved and merged soon !!!
   
   - The tests which had symbolic additive powers like `x**(n-2)*cos(x)` were failing with the old code. I had to thus define a property `fps_sym` (which indicates if the formal power series object has a symbolic term in the function), which helped in clearing all the previous `XFAIL` tests.
   
   - Sartaj also told me to look into [PR #13854](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/13854), which stemmed from [Issue #12310](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/issues/12310). This was an old PR of mine, and it concerned about correcting `fps of polynomials`. Discussion has begun about this already, and I hope to make a new PR soon.
   
   - I have alreday started thinking about implementing `convolution` and `composition` operations of fps as of now. I will be looking into the source code for `discrete convolution` of sequences in SymPy, to get a better understanding of how to implement convolution. Also I have figured out the closed form of `composition`, which involves `Bell Polynomials` in the coefficient sequence of the resultant fps. Further implementation requires discussion.
   
See you all in the next week !! Bye-bye till then !!
